---
title: Building an Ethereum Dapp With GraphQL
subtitle: Using GraphQL as a query language for your smart contracts
path: '/blog/ethereum-and-graphql'
date: '2019-03-01'
---

Even the simplest decentralized applications involve information that is spread
across many different sources. On top of that, unless we are very careful, our
components can easily become intimately tied with the architecture details of our
application. In this blog post, I will show you how to use GraphQL as a powerful
abstraction over your contracts that ultimately simplifies the construction and
maintainence of your dapp's user interface.

_This post is not meant to be an introduction to ethereum, smart contracts, or graphql.
That being said, I will try to explain enough that you shouldn't need too much more than
a conceptual familiarity with either to follow along. For a good introduction to the basics
of decentralized applications, I recommend
[this article](https://medium.com/@mvmurthy/ethereum-for-web-developers-890be23d1d0c).
For an introduction to GraphQL I recommend [starting here](https://graphql.org/learn/)._

=-=

In this post we will build an auction platform like [eBay](https://ebay.com) where users can
post items for sale. For this post, we will only go over how to fire a single query. If you
would like to see a more fleshed out example in the form of a series, please let me know on
twitter or [this blog's repo](https://github.com/AlecAivazis/homepage).

The code for this post lives [on GitHub](https://github.com/AlecAivazis/ethereum-graphql-demo).
The platform is made up of two different contracts. One is called `AuctionHub` which maintains
a list of addresses that point to instances of another contract called `Auction`. That second
contract only has a single public field for illustrative purposes: the name of the item for sale.

# Deploying The Contracts

Let's begin by deployin some contracts so we have something to query in our UI. Clone the
demo project and install the project dependencies. Just a heads up: this might take a bit.

```bash
git clone git@github.com:AlecAivazis/ethereum-graphql-demo.git \
    && cd ethereum-graphql-demo \
    && npm i
```

Once it's done, start a local ethereum blockchain we can test against:

```bash
npm run testnet
```

Notice the list of accounts under `Available Accounts`. We'll need one of them later. In
another terminal, compile the contracts:

```bash
npm run build:contracts
```

This should generate two files for each contract under `contracts/*`. The `*.bin` files are
the compiled version of each contract and the `*.abi` are json files that describe the contents
of the contract (attributes, methods, etc.).

The demo project comes with a script that will bootstrap a few constracts and print the
address of the hub. Before you can run it, you have to update the address that you want
to use when creating our test contracts
[here](https://github.com/AlecAivazis/ethereum-graphql-demo/blob/master/scripts/init.js#L10).
Once that is updated, you can create the demo contracts with:

```bash
npm run init
```

If everything went according to plan, you should see the address of the hub that we just deployed.
Take note of this address, we'll need it later when defining our schema. With our contracts deployed,
we are now ready to start querying them with GraphQL.

# Ethereum and GraphQL

If you have heard of GraphQL before, it's very likely that it was as a query language for a remote
server's API. In the decentralized world, there is no central server like there
is in traditional architectures. That does not mean, however, that we cannot take advantage of
all of the amazing tooling that the GraphQL community has produced.

By defining a schema that exists only in our client, we can use GraphQL as an abstraction layer over
our collection of contracts. This allows us to query the current state of our platform as if it was
a traditional server and resolve queries against the blockchain.

# Building Our Client

The repo already contains a very basic UI that that we can just use without worrying too much about
how it works. Just know that if you update the queries that your components are firing, or the graphql
schema, you have to re-run the compiler with `npm run relay` for the changes to take effect.

## Defining the Schema

The first step to building our client-side graphql layer is the same as in the traditional world: define
a schema to represent our domain. This model should represent your product's domain regardless of the
persistence and execution details. Ideally, a centralized and decentralized version of the same application
would have almost identical schemas. Wheras before the schema acted as an agreement between the server and client,
in our decentralized world, this schema encodes the internal API between our UI and our contracts.
This schema and its resolvers can even act as the handoff between separate teams responsible for blockchain and UI development (if that separation makes sense for you).

Let's see how this works. Start by adding a file named `schema.js` under the `src/` directory with this content:

```javascript
import { makeExecutableSchema } from 'graphql-tools'

const schema = `
    type Auction {
        id: ID!
        itemName: String!
    }

    type Query {
        allAuctions: [Auction!]!
    }
`

export default makeExecutableSchema({
    typeDefs: schema,
})
```

If you have experience with the `graphql-tools` package then this should look familiar. What we've done
here is define a GraphQL schema that let's us query for all of the auctions in our system. You'll notice that
there is no mention of `AuctionHub` anywhere. Its existence does not need to leak
into the UI's model of the platform's state. We're already seeing some benefits to this setup! Our UI
team doesn't have to understand how to find each auction. As we'll see in the bit, they just have
to be able to fire a query like `{ allAuctions { itemName } }`.

## Specifying Resolvers

On it's own, a schema is not enough to resolve queries. We also need to tell the runtime
how to resolve the requested fields. This is done by defining an object whose keys are the type name and
whose values are another object with the field resolvers:

```javascript
import { makeExecutableSchema } from 'graphql-tools'
import { HubABI, AuctionABI, web3 } from '../contracts'

const schema = ...

const resolvers = {
    Auction: {
        // for now just use the address as the id
        id: auction => auction.options.address,
        // auction is an instance of the Auction contract wrapper
        itemName: auction => auction.methods.itemName().call(),
    },
    Query: {
        allAuctions: () => {
            // create a reference to the hub contract we created earlier
            const hub = new web3.eth.Contract(HubABI, 'hub address from before')

            // build the list of auctions
            const auctions = []
            for (let i = 0; i < await hub.methods.auctionCount().call(); i++) {
                auctions.push(
                    new web3.eth.Contract(
                        AuctionABI,
                        await hub.methods.auctions(i).call()
                    )
                )
            }

            return auctions
        }
    },
}

export default makeExecutableSchema({
    typeDefs: schema,
    resolvers,
})
```

As you can see, we've told the runtime that resolving the `itemName` field on the
`Auction` object type requires invoking `itemName` method on the instance of the auction contract.
This returns a promise with the the value of a
["constant" method](https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.0/web3-eth-contract.html#methods-mymethod-call) which
will give us the string we want.
Similarly, we resolve the list of all available auctions by looking at the auction hub
we created earlier and returning an instance of the auction constract for each address stored in the hub.

It's worth highlighting again that by doing this, we have completely abstracted away the existence of
the hub from the user interface. If we do in fact have separate teams working on the UI and
the blockchain infrastructure, this schema acts as a convinient touch point between the two teams.

## Querying Our Schema

With our schema in place, we are now ready to start wiring up the user interface and our contracts.
In relay (the graphql framework used by the demo project), the central specification for how a query
is resolved lives in an object known as the
[Environment](https://facebook.github.io/relay/docs/en/relay-environment.html). This is analogous
to a mixture of Apollo's `Link` and `Client` as described
[here](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/link/#apollo-client).

If you open up `src/environment.js` in the the demo project, you'll see that it already contains a lot of
the boilerplate necessary to define an environment. There is, however, a core piece missing - the actual logic
to resolve the query. Let's add that now:

```javascript
import { graphql } from 'graphql'
import schema from './schema'

function fetchQuery(operation, variables) {
    return graphql(schema, operation.text, null, null, variables)
}

// ... everything else...
```

As you can see, resolving our queries does not involve firing a network request as it would in the centralized
case. Instead, we just pass the query to the `graphql` function which uses the resolvers that we defined earlier
to handle whatever queries we want.

With those two files in place, we should now be able to run our client and see a list of the auctions in
our platform. Start the development server with:

```bash
npm run relay && npm run dev
```

and navigate to http://localhost:8000. If everything goes right, you should now see a list of items - one for
the three auctions we created in the init script.

# Why is this Better?

By now you might be asking yourself if going through all this effort was worth it. If you have experience
working with `web3` then you know that the imperative API can become extremely duplicative without some
kind of domain specific abstraction layer. Take for example the code necessary to grab a list of every
auction in our platform (copied from above):

```javascript
// create a reference to the hub contract we created earlier
const hub = new web3.eth.Contract(HubABI, 'hub address from earlier')

// build the list of auctions
const auctions = []
for (let i = 0; i < (await hub.methods.auctionCount().call()); i++) {
    auctions.push(new web3.eth.Contract(AuctionABI, await hub.methods.auctions(i).call()))
}

return auctions
```

There are a lot of questions to answer when trying to figure out the best way to abstract this logic
into something reusable. Some parts of this are specific to our Auction/Hub breakdown. Other parts are
boilerplate that you will find any time you want to build up a list of something. Once we do have it
broken up how do we wrap up the logic in a way that makes our UI easy to consume? While there is no
silver bullet to all of these questions, each solution has its pros and cons. By using GraphQL
as a data-layer for your smart contracts, you can provide a robust integration for your UI components
that abstracts the details of the retrieval logic behind a declarative API. This does come at the
cost of an extra logical layer in your application.

Once you have gotten over effort of encapsulating your contracts in a single schema, you can take
advtange of all of the awesome tooling that the graphql community has produced. On top of that,
this model also enables an extremely smooth story for a semi-decentralized approach where information
comes from sources both on and off the chain. Since we are using the standard GraphQL tooling, we can
[stitch](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphql-tools/schema-stitching.html) our schema with
remote services and have a unified abstraction that let's us build our interfaces without worrying about
where the information is coming from. I have personally used a similar approach to drive authentication
for a dapp off of a popular oauth provider.

# Conclusion and Next Steps

In this post, I showed you how to build a client-side GraphQL schema that resolves against smart contracts
running on an ethereum network. We then wired the schema to our user interface so we could easily query
the state of our contracts. This provided a nice abstraction for our UI to query our contracts without
worrying about how to retrieve the requested data.

To keep things focused, we only went over how to resolve a single query against the blockchain. However, there
is a lot of things that can be added on top to make the developer experience and your application
[plus ultra](https://www.quora.com/What-does-plus-ultra-mean-in-the-My-Hero-Academia-anime). Some of
those include:

-   Integrating a client-side [playground](https://github.com/prisma/graphql-playground) so you can
    easily explore your contracts
-   Tying [contract events](https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.0/web3-eth-contract.html#events) into
    [GraphQL subscriptions](https://graphql.org/blog/subscriptions-in-graphql-and-relay/) for real
    time user interfaces.
-   Generating the Solidity types from your schema definition or vice versa

=-=

That's it for now - thanks for reading! Hopefully I've convinced you that there might be something interesting
to using GraphQL as a query interface for your smart contracts.

If you think this is a terrible idea, if you liked it, if you took a stab at the next steps, or you did
something else concerning this post, I want to know! Please reach out on twitter with your thoughts.

As always, if this is where we part ways, I hope you have a nice rest of your day.
